# Differential-Gene-Expression-Analysis-With-ALDEx2

ALDEx2 is a differential gene expression analysis tool based on compsositional data approach (CoDA). Pioneered by a statistician, John Aitchison, CoDA emerged as a compositional data approach (CoDA) analysis framework based on log ratios to examine constrained data represented by proportions. Commonly used in the geology field to investigate compositions of rocks, CoDA is also used for the analysis of metagenomic sequencing data. Recognizing the nature of sequencing data is what makes CoDA robust. In sequencing data, DNA fragments are incorporated into a library and a small proportion of the particular library is sequenced on a sequencing machine. Because the “proportions” are sequenced, the sequencing data could be considered as compositions instead of absolute count data. As such, the CoDA analysis takes account of the compositions and transforms data accordingly. It has been pointed out that sequencing data may be poorly fitted by the NB distribution model. The overdispersion in the model is related to the frequency of zeros in count data. In addition, a statistical model for sequencing data needs fine-tuning such that it does not yield false positives too much at the same time it does not yield enough true positives. As a result, the statistical method of sequencing data based on the NB distribution model may lead to a poor false discovery rate resulting in too many false positive findings though precise reasons are unclear. The nonparametric methods, often incorporated in the CoDA approach, do not rely on statistical assumptions of distributions and may be able to control the false discovery rate more effectively. 

ALDEx2 is installed via Bioconductor in R. It estimates per-feature technical variation within each sample using Monte-Carlo instances drawn from the Dirichlet distribution. The Dirichlet distribution is a distribution where ranges of multivariate values are zero to one and the sum of them becomes one. The Monte Carlo method is a statistical method to predict the probability of an uncertain quantity by randomly sampling and then repeating the sampling process (Junjariya, 2023). In ALDEx2, the values of features in the count matrix are turned into probabilities via Monte Carlo sampling from the Dirichlet distribution. Each value now is a vector of probabilities based on sampled Monte Carlo instances. 128 is the default number of instances used in ALDEx2. The Monte Carlo Dirichlet instances are CLR transformed yielding a vector of transformed values. The values are “the base 2 logarithms of the abundance of the feature in each Dirichlet instance in each sample divided by the geometric mean abundance of the Dirichlet instance of the sample” (Fernandes et al). Based on the BH correction, significances are adjusted for the log fold changes.

References: https://academic.oup.com/nargab/article/2/4/lqaa103/6028739, https://microbiomejournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/2049-2618-2-15, https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0224909, https://academic.oup.com/nargab/article/2/4/lqaa103/6028739

